---
layout: page
permalink: /teaching/
title: teaching
description: Teaching Philosophy.
nav: true
nav_order: 6
---

### Overarching Goal
My central educational philosophy as a tutor will revolve around mutual learning, which emerges from meaningful interactions within a discussion-centered environment. A teacher wields significant influence over a student's academic journey by igniting their interest in a particular subject, offering motivation, and fostering self-assurance. I have experienced this transformative impact on my own educational experience. When an instructor is not only an expert but also a facilitator of knowledge and curiosity, it sets the stage for remarkable academic growth. Encouraging students to explore, question, and engage in open dialogues empowers them to take ownership of their learning journey. Moreover, I have been continually intrigued by the complexities of human physiology, which serves as a powerful source of motivation in their learning pursuits. Through my teaching, I plan to nurture an environment where students acquire knowledge and develop a genuine passion for the subject matter, become more confident in their abilities, and engage in dynamic discussions. 

### Relevant Experience 
Even though I have never been employed as a classroom teacher before, I have gained a fair share of experience in tutoring students of different academic levels. At Virginia Tech there are opportunities for new postdocs to become involved in broader teaching and outreach activities through the Center for the Enhancement of Engineering Diversity (CEED), specifically, (1) pre-college programs such as Imagination (rising 7th and 8th graders) and Pathways for Future Engineers (first generation rising 10-12th graders), and (2) summer bridge programs such as the Student Transition Engineering Program (STEP) for incoming freshmen, particularly those from women and underrepresented groups. I have been participating in some of these programs since 2021. The primary objective of this program is to design interactive scientific courses to engage with pre-college students and encourage them to pursue an engineering degree. I have designed a 4-day crash course ‘Detection and Ranging’ for pre-college students describing the usage of the over-the-horizon radar in space science. Furthermore, since 2021, I have been actively involved in volunteering as faculty for Science and Collaborative Talks organized by CEED at Virginia Tech. This initiative serves as an opportunity for me to present and showcase my research to undergraduate students, particularly freshmen. 

Furthermore, I obtained more in-depth interactions with undergraduate and graduate students at Virginia Tech SuperDARN Lab. As a part of the 2018 Google Summer of Code Program, I co-mentored an undergraduate student for three months. I guided her to gain an understanding of the SuperDARN observations and various machine-learning methods to classify the observations into different categories.

### Teaching/Mentoring Plans and Methods 
I will employ a diverse array of teaching methodologies to create an engaging and inclusive learning environment. These methods will encompass online courses and resources, project-based assessments, class discussions, and presentations. My goal is to foster participation-based learning that motivates and captivates students throughout their educational journey. Recognizing the importance of accommodating students with diverse backgrounds and needs, I will implement inclusive measures such as online lecture broadcasting and virtual office hours. This ensures accessibility for all, including those with responsibilities like childcare. I am well-prepared to teach courses at both the undergraduate and graduate levels, drawing from my expertise in subjects such as Intermediate Electricity and Magnetism and Electromagnetic Theory.

Besides, I have been trained as an Electronics and Communication Engineer during my undergraduate, which provides me an added advantage to teaching undergraduate-level circuit and signal courses. While doing a teaching assistantship during my graduate studies I was involved in Analog Circuit design labs. 

Furthermore, I eagerly anticipate the opportunity to contribute to curriculum development by creating new courses, including one I have envisioned: "Introduction to Machine Learning in Space Weather." With my background in data analytics and machine learning, I am equipped to craft this course, which will focus on the practical application and societal implications of Space Weather. In its design, I intend to adopt a project-based approach, encouraging students to work on meaningful projects throughout the semester. They will engage in activities such as coding, utilization of existing software tools for space physics data analysis, data visualization, and interpretation. I intend to include some of my recent data-driven/modeling space weather research topics in this course. This will give students a hands-on experience to use the datasets in our field in machine learning models and benchmark their models against published results. 

### Outside of the Classroom 
I will empower students to become independent learners, extending their knowledge beyond space physics. My will emphasizes not just subject-specific expertise, but also the vital skills of effective communication and collaboration. In addition, I plan to leverage available resources and platforms to broaden students' horizons. This includes introducing them to research and career opportunities, engaging in citizen science and outreach programs, and facilitating participation in domestic and international summer schools and workshops with travel support. 

In conclusion, my teaching philosophy will center on nurturing curiosity, critical thinking, practical skills, inclusivity, mentorship, adaptability, and ethical conduct. I will be dedicated to empowering students to become confident, knowledgeable, and responsible contributors to the field of space weather, all while remaining enthusiastic about the endless wonders of our dynamic space environment.
