---
layout: page
title: AGW-driven impacts on HF
description: Ionospheric responses to acoustic and gravity waves on HF communication
img: assets/img/AGWData.png
importance: 3
category: Research
---

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/AGW-SuperDARN.png" title="2 Layer Model Output" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    SuperDARN operation for identifying MSTID is shown: (A) schematic plot of SuperDARN radar ray paths of ground scatter and ionospheric scatter, (B) Fields-of-View (FoV) of SuperDARN HF radars used in this study, (C) HF ray tracing showing radar rays modulated by an MSTID passing through the F Region ionosphere. (D) Geometry used to derive the ground scatter location mapping, (E) range-time-intensity (RTI) plot of ground scatter power showing MSTIDs observed by Blackstone (BKS) Beam 15 during daytime, 19 November 2010. MSTID signatures are observed as bright red stripes with a negative slope.
</div>

This research focuses on investigating the influence of ionospheric disturbances generated by thunderstorms and snowstorms on High-Frequency (HF) communication systems utilizing SuperDARN radars. Employing the Provision of High-Frequency Raytracing Laboratory for Propagation Studies (PHaRLAP), a 3D raytracing tool, I aim to quantify alterations in the Maximum Usable Frequency (MUF). This assessment is crucial for understanding the impact of transient ionospheric irregularities induced by severe weather phenomena on HF radio wave propagation. The methodology involves utilizing observational data from SuperDARN radars, which are adept at capturing the dynamic behavior of the ionosphere during such meteorological events. The quantitative analysis of changes in MUF serves as a robust metric to assess the resilience and reliability of HF communication systems under the influence of natural atmospheric disturbances. This work contributes to the broader understanding of ionospheric effects on radio wave propagation, providing valuable insights for optimizing communication systems in adverse weather conditions[^1].

[^1]: Co-I (Institutional PI) of NASA LWS Research Award ‘Ionospheric responses to thunderstorm-generated acoustic and gravity waves over the continental US’ [2022-2026] [NNH21ZDA001N](https://lwstrt.gsfc.nasa.gov/TCPDF-master/examples/export.php?action=pdf&params[type]=citation&params[optionid]=4180&params[rosesid]=NNH21ZDA001N&params[piname]=Shantanab%20Debchoudhury).